.TH NANOCA 1 "30 March 2026" "1.5.3" "nanoca User Manual"

.SH NAME
nanoca \- simple X.509 Certificate Authority


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nanoca
[\fB\-h\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR]
[\fB\-y\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR|\fB\-\-dir\fR \fICADIR\fR]
.IR command
[args...]


.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nanoca
is a simple openssl based X.509 CA using files on disk. It can
create and sign signing requests and create a CRL with revoked certificates.
Multiple CAs can easily be created and are completely represented by files
in user specified directories, one per CA. See available commands below.


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and then exit.

.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.

.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Answer yes to all questions and use defaults. Useful in non-interactive cases. Only
used for the create and sign commands for the time being.

.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dir =\fICADIR\fR
Path to where the CA resides. Defaults to current working directory if not given.


.SH COMMANDS
Below is the list of commands that \fBnanoca\fR supports and their arguments. All
commands, except \fBreq\fR, are required to be run while standing in the directory
where the CA resides unless the CA directory is given with the \fB\-\-dir\fR
option.

.TP
.BR create
Create a new CA in the current working directory (or in \fICADIR\fR if given by
the \fB\-\-dir\fR option). The directory must be empty. Configuration will be asked
for interactively. Settings will be picked up by the following environment variables
if they are set (the first six are the CA subject and if left blank the attribute in
question will not be included in the subject):

\fBCA_C\fR - ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 Country Code

\fBCA_ST\fR - State or Province

\fBCA_L\fR - Location or City

\fBCA_O\fR - Organization

\fBCA_OU\fR - Organizational Unit

\fBCA_CN\fR - Common Name (mandatory if run with \fB\-\-yes\fR). Must match ^[a-zA-Z0-9\ \-]+$

\fBCA_YEARS\fR - CA lifespan in years (defaults to 20 if not given)

\fBCA_RSA_KEYSIZE\fR - RSA keysize. 2048 or 4096 (defaults to 2048 if not given)

\fBCA_SIGNED_CERT_DAYS\fR - Lifespan in days for signed certificates (defaults to 365 if not given)

\fBCA_CRL_DAYS\fR - Lifespan in days for generated CRLs (defaults to 30 if not given)

If the \fB\-\-yes\fR option is given, the creation is performed without interaction by
using the above environment variables. All but \fBCA_CN\fR are optional.

.TP
.BR list
List certificates that the CA has created.

.TP
\fBsign\fR \fICSR\fR [\fICRT\fR]
Create a new certificate by signing the signing request pointed to by \fICSR\fR.
\fICSR\fR must be a path to a PEM encoded file containing the \fICSR\fR and must
end with \'.csr\'. \fICRT\fR is the path to where the new certificate will be
written. If left out, defaults to \fICSR\fR but with the \'.csr\' extension
replaced with \'.crt\'. If the \fB\-\-yes\fR option is given, the signing is done
without any questions and with the defaults. Useful for non-interactive use in
scripts.

.TP
\fBre-sign\fR \fISERIAL\fR \fICRT\fR
Create a new certificate by signing a previous signing request re-using the
\fICSR\fR that is cached inside the CA. \fISERIAL\fR must be the serial number
for an existing certificate and \fICRT\fR the path to where the new certificate
will be written. Use the \fBlist\fR command to see available certificates and
their serial numbers.

.TP
\fBrevoke\fR \fISERIAL\fR
Revoke a previously created certificate. \fISERIAL\fR must be the serial number
for an existing certificate. Use the list command to see available certificates
and their serial numbers. Note: The CRL will not be updated. The \fBrecreate-crl\fR
command need to be run to generate a new CRL.

.TP
.BR recreate-crl
Recreate the CRL. Must be used regularly since a CRL has a limited lifespan. If
CRLs for the CA is to be used, this command must be run at even intervals and
the new CRL to be distributed to everyone using the CA.

.TP
\fBreq\fR \fIKEY\fR \fICSR\fR
Create a new Certificate Signing Request. The request will use the PEM encoded
key file pointed to by \fIKEY\fR. If the file does not exist, a new key will be
created and written to the file pointed to by \fIKEY\fR. \fICSR\fR should
be a path to where the request will be written. The \fIKEY\fR argument can also
be a PKCS11 URI pointing to a key on a hardware device like a smart card. If
you only have one smart card inserted in the computer, the string \"pkcs11:\"
is sufficient. Request parameters will be asked for interactively.

Note 1: This command does not require a previously setup CA and can be run from
any working directory.

Note 2: Smart card support requires that openssl has
support for engine and that the openssl pkcs11 engine is installed. You also
need a properly setup smart card.

.TP
.BR name
Print the Common Name of the CA.


.SH EXAMPLES
Below are some examples of how to use \fBnanoca\fR:

Create a new CA:
    $ mkdir my_ca
    $ cd my_ca
    $ nanoca create

Sign the CSR /tmp/mycert.csr and write the cert to /tmp/mycert.crt:
    $ nanoca --dir=my_ca sign /tmp/mycert.csr /tmp/mycert.crt

List certificates that the CA has signed:
    $ cd my_ca
    $ nanoca list

Revoke certificate with serial number 05:
    $ cd my_ca
    $ nanoca revoke 05

Create a new key and CSR in /tmp/mycert.key and /tmp/mycert.csr:
    $ nanoca req /tmp/mycert.key /tmp/mycert.csr


.SH SEE ALSO
\fIhttps://github.com/johanhedin/nanoca\fR
